# Chapter One - Collectively Preventing Self Destruction

One of the biggest surprises I've encountered in dealing with people when I want to share information about energy and the promise of nuclear energy, is that a strange thing happens after the conversation. The people seem happier.

It never occurred to me that in general there are an overwhelming number of people out there who have quietly given up, who think there are no good solutions. Scientifically literate people in particular take a dim view of getting out of this mess. Most people are not going around blissfully happy and totally ignorant of how serious things have gotten. The feeling usually goes unspoken and rarely gets acknowledged. I have concluded that most people expect doomsday scenarios for our future. But many have resolved themselves to the idea that the worst will happen after they die and choose not to share their thoughts about it and in other cases avoid thinking about it.

But if we want to be able to say we contributed something towards a livable future, doing nothing is an unrewarding path and places you in the category of a wimpy, somewhat immoral and fatalistic position. With our American way of life, where societal change happens very gradually, it is easy to be convinced that any effort we make to change things is futile. With so many “God-fearing" christians, the real challenge they face is remembering that the lives that matter are the people who still remain when we are gone, and not our own place in heaven. What ever way you look at it, we know large numbers of people are already affected seriously by climate extremes. Most people, especially seniors, feel they will die before the worst happens. But if there was a way to reverse this path to catastrophe would you push for it? Don’t you want the human race to thrive and prosper? I think that was the appeal of shows like Star Trek. Writing about a future when people have evolved and solved problems, the message "live long and prosper" has significant meaning, knowing our existence could continue with a high standard of living. The people in Energy Reality are full of those who thoroughly understand this. They respect the scientific method that has brought us the wonders of technology that has transformed our society. And those who made the effort to learn also know the situation is urgent and choosing a renewable path is like trying to cure cancer with an aspirin. Read on to discover why that is true.

Succeeding in preventing a disastrous future will be one tremendously big undertaking. The plan of the people on the liberal side reently lost some of it's puch with Bernie Sanders stepping down from the race. The outrageous Green New Deal wants to increase usage of renewable energy while eliminating coal by replacing it with some unknown energy source, presumably replacing it with natural gas. That's only the goal of the left in North America. The Republicans and Canadian Conservatives have a different agenda. With Donald Trump muzzling scientists and pretending climate change is not an issue and Doug Ford and his colleagues in Canada pushing for no carbon tax we have forces working against real change. I propose that nuclear energy provides the solution we've been looking for that both sides seek. Many countries say they want to stop emissions but coal continues to be used at an unacceptable rate<sup><a href="#ch1-1">1-1</a></sup>. As you will see reading on, this presents a serious lack of vision. We need to be much more analytical in prescribing solutions. The decision-makers are letting "green" entrepreneurs set the policy. I will attempt to clarify why this is a dangerous plan of action and how we can get back on the correct path, closer to a vision we held in the 1950s and 60s.

There are plenty of doomsday scenarios and it is not easy to recognize what needs to be done without closely studying the scope of the situation. It will involve dedicated people to push for extreme measures. We don't have the strong leaders like Winston Churchill anymore who understood how to motivate people into action. During the Second World War after Britain had witnessed the horrific bombings, the occupation of France and the retreat of the Canadians, Winston Churchill finished his long speech<sup><a href="#ch1-2">1-2</a></sup> about how effectively Hitler had defeated so many and seemed nearly unbeatable. Churchill wanted the bickering and the unproductive babbling from critics to stop.

> "... if we fail, then the whole world, including the United States, including all that we have known and cared for, will sink into the abyss of a new Dark Age made more sinister, and perhaps more protracted, by the lights of perverted science. Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duties, and so bear ourselves that, if the British Empire and its Commonwealth last for a thousand years, men will still say, 'This was their finest hour.'"

Our dark age is upon us. The "sinister aspect" is hidden in political agendas. Consequently, a similar kind of challenge exists for us. I hope to show that the path to remediate a sick system is not so unattainable. We humans, as a collective, need to prevent our existence from evolving into an irreversible path. As individuals we need to change the way we think. If governments or corporations want our support, we can hold them accountable and insist that they contribute. So I'm after more than just “hope." I'm after giving some direction as to how to contribute to the cause, whether it be  climate change, ocean remediation, food supply, disease control or carbon emissions,  exactly what I hope you will gain after reading this book.

You might be surprised to find out how the things that really matter to us, like the future for our children, grandchildren and keeping ourselves safe and employed, are also connected to this networking opportunity called the <a href="https://energyrealityproject.com" target="_blank">Energy Reality Project</a><sup><a href="#ch1-3">1-3</a></sup>.

You may find that what’s missing, the thing that could help you cope, is a sense of unity, a feeling that we're not alone, that when our focus is absent that somebody is still present pushing for the same basic needs. That’s why we need to get real with energy and choose to become involved with the Energy Reality Project.
