# Prelude

In music, a prelude is a kind of musical form that can be structured or free, but nonetheless provides a way to prepare the listener for something more complex and important. The same can be said of an overture. Which label to use is a matter of scale and since the scope of this book is less like an opera but more like a Bach fugue let this be my prelude to a topic that is indeed important and it does indeed need some preparation.

Energy is fundamental to human survival and prosperity. It has been and always will be. It is a good thing that countries, who historically have lived in poverty and been ruled by leaders unwilling or unable to improve living conditions, have now finally started to grow economically. But the  quality of life we experience depends on the kind of energy we use and how we regulate it. Coal is the dominant energy source and why that needs to change is what this book is about.

As a Canadian and resident of Toronto, Ontario I have a unique perspective on Energy. Being Canadian means getting used to weather extremes. Our winters require heat for months at a time. Our homes have undergone technological transitions keeping up with the pace of modernization, each time  adapting to the kinds of energy used to heat them. Over a hundred years ago we relied on wood stoves and coal. Then advances in furnace design let us depend on oil and electricity. The fireplace or wood stove could always come to the rescue on cold nights. Now, if we have an extended power failure in the winter<a href="#pr-1"><sup>[0-1]</sup></a>, most homes are not equipped with wood stoves or coal. Many of us could freeze to death.  If we play too much with the energy mix, such as adding too much wind and solar, and shut down nuclear plants, as has happened in Germany, the scenario of winter blackouts is not so far fetched.

90% of Ontario’s energy is emission free<a href="#pr-2"><sup>0-2</sup></a>. Nuclear provides  60% and hydro provides 25%. But wind and solar energy are not always available. We unfortunately have chosen natural gas to fill in the gaps. That releases large amounts of CO₂.



## Can You Handle the Truth?

The truth is that CO₂ has been accumulating and increasing faster than the oceans can handle. Writing a book like this means I have a responsibility to share what I perceive to be true. Specifically, that we can no longer simply support any random green movement and think it is better than doing nothing. Our tipping point is rapidly approaching. To make our planet whole again means we can no longer simply stop emitting various greenhouse gases. We need to capture the excess accumulation of gases and convert them back to a solid so they no longer occupy the air or the oceans<a href="#pr-3"><sup>0-3</sup></a>

We are faced with a challenge as a human race. Indisputable evidence reveals that we have been too busy using the planet’s resources to notice we have gone too far. Technology has given us toys that consume enormous amounts of electricity and fossil fuels. We have grown accustomed to abundant energy.  Most people don’t even question where their electricity comes from let alone what energy is best for the environment. When the question does come up there is little awareness of the actual energy mix.

Climate scientists and ecologists who endorse nuclear energy are calling on us to take action to reverse climate change. These  environmentalists<strong><a href="#pr-4"><sup>0-4</sup></a></strong> have concluded that to prevent the threat to species extinction and quality of life issues that nuclear energy is the best solution. We need zero greenhouse gas emissions. Only nuclear can be scaled fast enough and robustly enough to be able to replace the abundant energy that coal currently provides.  Clearly these pro-nuclear supporters are not afraid of nuclear reactors. How did they become supporters?


It is difficult to step out of the shadow of fear. They say the truth will set you free. Don’t take my word for it. Research it yourself. Begin by looking up deaths per kWh (kilowatt-hour) for each energy source. Also look up half-lives and the inverse relationship of short half-lives to radiation intensity<strong><a href="#pr-5"><sup>0-5</sup></a></strong>; how short half-lives make for quicker decay and disappearance of the more radioactive elements. Then look up hormesis and the evidence that small doses of radiation above a certain amount<strong><a href="#pr-6"><sup>0-6</sup></a></strong> actually benefits us.&nbsp; Then try to understand how the excessive safety<strong><a href="#pr-7"><sup>0-7</sup></a></strong> requirement of nuclear plants drives up their cost. The nuclear industry in North America has been subjected to an unbearable amount of scrutiny and interference. Playing into the fears of the average citizen, corporate forces have lobbied to prey on the perceived weakness in nuclear energy. The radiation levels considered safe are based on false outdated information. I'll be explaining more about this in later chapters.

In order for wind and solar to take on the role of replacing coal it would  require more raw materials than are available worldwide<strong><a href="#pr-8"><sup>0-8</sup></a></strong>. Also, natural gas has been known to leak. Being a much stronger green house gas it only takes a 4% leakage rate<strong><a href="#pr-9"><sup>0-9</sup></a></strong> to equal the CO₂ emissions of coal.

The effort to do anything resembling a Green New Deal is gargantuan and will likely bankrupt whoever invests. It would be much easier to reform the regulatory system and construction methodology for nuclear energy in order to bring costs down.

Now we have new companies like Ontario's Terrestrial Energy<strong><a href="#pr-10"><sup>0-10</sup></a></strong> showing us the potential of new designs that are even safer than already "very-safe" nuclear technology providing a way to take spent nuclear fuel as an excellent source of energy.

Refurbishing<strong><a href="#pr-11"><sup>0-11</sup></a></strong> reactors is really a complete upgrade, easily doubling their lifespan but also improving efficiency, the physics and the chemistry. No other energy source gets so thoroughly scrutinized. As a result they are the safest and cleanest long-lasting energy sources available. One big advantage is that their power easily equals that of coal, making our quest for an end to coal achievable. The remaining question is whether it will be cost competitive. The thinking process that manifests in very real negative results, is “fear" of radiation which results in an overburdened industry that is far more expensive than it needs to be.  Fortunately the new companies have well understood this challenge and expect to build new reactors cheaper than coal.

Among the antinuclear citizens of Ontario there has been a push to seek replacing nuclear energy with Hydro power from Quebec. Recently my friend Steve Aplin of Canadian Energy Issues&nbsp; commented: “Has anybody asked Quebec if they are willing to create another lake the size of Belgium<strong><a href="#pr-12"><sup>0-12</sup></a></strong> to provide the hydro power needed by Ontario? The answer would be a polite no."

The Dalai Lama, James Hansen and countless scientists who support nuclear energy indicate that acceptance is a matter of education. Once we get over the irrational fears of radiation and false connections to nuclear weapons we can then consider how nuclear energy can make a better future.
